In order of importance 

1) 

Overtone series and intervals 

Term: Sound

Sound manifests as pressue waves of air, vibrating at various frequencies.  

In our ears, changing waves of air pressure trigger a neurological response.  


Term: Frequency

Freqency describes how quicky a vibration occurs, in terms of how many times it goes back and forth within a span of time, typically measured in cyles per second (Hz)

Scientifically, we can analyze any sound according to the relative strength of different frequencies.  


Term: Tone

Sound sources that sound "noisy" are genearlly composed of a range of frequencies, without any that stand out.

Whereas, what makes a musical sound is the ability to focus the range of freqencies to a smaller number, and produce what we call tone.   


Term: Fundamental

In general, any note played on a tonal instrument can be characterized according to a fundamental frequency which is the loudest, as well as additional higher frequencies that are softer.  


Term: Pitch

We assign a name to a tone based on its fundamental frequency.  
For example, for a tone with fundamental frequency of 440Hz, we define that as the pitch "A".

In addition, we treat integer multiples of this frequency as the same pitch name.  For example, a tone with fundamental frequency 880Hz is also the pitch "A".  

So, in general, the term pitch is less distinct than a frequency.  



Term: Overtone

The difference in sound (for sustained sounds) between different instruments such as a flute, violin, trumpet or voice, lies in the relative strengths of the overtones.

In addition, the our general concept of which notes sound good when played together comes from the relationship between overtones.

This means that when two tones are played together, when the second tone has a fundamental frequency that matches an overtone of a first tone, we find that pleasing.

Likewise, when a second tone has an overtone that matches the fundamental frequency of the first tone, we find that pleasing.

In addition, we perceive a relationship between these two sounds, and an asymmetry in terms of 



Interval: Octave
Interval: Fifth
Interval: Fourth

Symmetry says:  Pick a note.  Using this note as a fundamental, it will generate the note a 5th above it.  Likewise, there is another fundamental note below our note, which will generate our note as the 5th above itself.








Symmetry



Interval: Major 3rd 
Interval: Minor 3rd

Triads: Major 
Triads: Minor  

Chords: Dominant 7th
Chords: Minor 7th


2 ) 



Overtone series : on a single note & set of notes you can play on an instrument with the same fingering
Frequencies
Playing another note whose fundamental 

What is tonality?  It is an expression of asymmetry that prioritizes a single tone as the reference point of resolution.

How is tonality established



Symmetry vs Asymmetry  
"Divided equally" "each interval is the same"

Keyboard layout vs clock layout 


Derive major scale from the overtone series
what is the complement

How to go through all keys 


Chromatically upwards & downwards
By 4th/5th upwards & downwards



How to find the 4th?
1) go up the major scale 3 steps
2) go up to the 5th then down 2 chromatic steps




